# html-css
projects and files to learn html and css

video references: 

- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G3e-cpL7ofc
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gXLjWRteuWI

two things needed for course:

- web browser
- code editor

## HTML Basics

HTML stands for hypertext markup language and it's a tool to create websites. Every website uses a combo of HTML and css to create everything we see on the website.

HTML is giving instructions to the computer and telling it what to do step by step. The computer will then follow those instructions to create the website.

First things we learned were two HTML elements:

```html
<button>Button</button>
<p>Paragraph</p>
```

Computers read the HTML commands from top to bottom, and then execute the lines in order.

### HTML Elements

elements are generic terms that describe anything that can be displayed on the webpage. 

The syntax for this are the open and closed brackets. The syntax must be 100%  correct for the computer to understand what's written. 

The open and closed brackets are the syntax for tags. Inside the brackets is the element we want to display. Tags have opening and closing tags. In between the tags is the content inside the element.

#### Link Element

Hyperlinks are ways to reference other websites. These are defined by the anchor element, which is a link to another website.

Inside the anchor tags is the text of the link. To define where the link takes the user, you can use an attribute in the opening tag, specifically the href attribute.

```html
<a href="https://youtube.com">Youtube</a>
```

Attributes modify how an element behaves.

The syntax rules for an attribute is to have a space between the attribute and the tag name, then an equal sign (=) then the value, surrounded by double quotes (must be double quotes). The  attribute tells you what you are modifying, and the value defines what you are modifying it too.

You can have multiple attributes in one tag too. 

NOTE: for anchors, there is a target tag that directs whether or not the href website opens in a new tab or in the current page. 

The href and the target attribute only work on the anchor element.

Elements have unique attributes, and you have to get familiar with the common attributes for each.

### HTML Quirks

if you have multiple spaces in the content, extra spaces are ignored because of the syntax. You can't use spaces between tags to add space between elements when they are represented. 

Also, newlines are ignored as extra spaces too, which makes organizing the html code very flexible and can be made readable very easily. 

Some coders put the content on a newline from the tags, with the tags starting at the same tab spacing. When you do this, put an indent before the content to indicate where an element starts and stops. In HTML and CSS, two spaces are a single indent. 

## part 2: Css Basics

Css: cascading style sheets.

These are used to change the appearance of the HTML elements. 

To add css, you need to add a style element to the HTML document. This tag doesn't create anything, but inside it you can write css code, which modifies the appearance of other elements.

The syntax for the css code is below:

```html
button {
    background-color: red;
}
```

This is similar to html because its giving instructions to the computer, and it has some specific syntax to make sure the code is interpreted correctly. 

The CSS selector is the name of the HTML element the css will modify. In the brackets, the css properties will be listed, to indicate which property you'd like to change, and then the value specifies what you'd like to change the property to. 

You can add multiple css properties in the brackets. 

The general technique to make an element appear like something you see on another website is to change properties one by one until you get the display you want. 

The measurements for display properties in css is pixels, which you'll get a feel for the more you make css properties. It will always involve some trial and error though.

### Colors

For defining colors, css uses a tuple defining rgb values, which is a more precise way to define a color. Every color can be generated by a combination of red,green, and blue, and the tuple correspond to the amount of each color is included in the display color. The minimum value for each is 0, and the maximum value is 255. 

Don't worry about knowing these from looking. The only ones you should remember is that setting all the values to the maximum creates white, and setting all three to zero creates black. 

### General technique

create the button, then set the styles one by one. 

Look at an example design that you want to use, and then break it down, property by property to get closer to the product you want. 

### Css Properties

You aren't going to memorize these, use google to look for what you want to do for a particular html element. 


### Tagging Tags

If you don't specify particular elements, the css applies to every element of the particular tag. 

You can use an attribute called `class` to tag a particular element. 

You reference the class name in css with a dot operator.

```css
    .subscribe-button {

    }
```

This restricts elements to the class specified.

### Adding space

in css space is called margin, setting the margin allows you to define how much space is between the html elements.

### Designing Note

for starting off, its easy to design by eye, but there are ways to get specific colors and sizes of elements from webpages.

Also, a couple modern button notes:

- rounded edges seem to be very popular
- also, not capitalizing every word (just the first word or the important words of a phrase)
- One popular thing seems to be, for buttons placed next to one another, one button should have white text with a bakcground, and one should have colored text with a white bakcground.


## Hovers Transitions and Shadows

Hover properties apply only when the mouse cursor is hovering over the html element. This is a psuedo-class in css.

There are other psuedo classes like:

- active

And these are accessed by writing the following in the css file:

```css
.button-name:active {

}
```

See the button-exercise file for examples.

## Chrome Dev Tools 

when you right click in the browser, you can view all the html on the page, and you can also look at the html tags and see the css applied to the button.

You can use the dev tools to see all the html and css to see the exact styles being used.

there is a pointer icon in the top left of the dev tools window that will allow you to click on an element on the webpage to see what element properties and css properties the element uses. 

The web tools will show colors in hexadecimal code instead of rgb, but there are hex to rgb calculators on the web. 

There's also a computed tab that shows all the final styles applied to an element on a webpage. like the final calculated hieght, width, padding, etc. To copy and paste these things into the code. This allows you to pull from the internet at will using the dev tools. 

## CSS box model 

The first part of this is setting margins. This is the area outside of the element. You can do a margin around the full element or add margin in a specific direction. 

The second part of the box model is the spacing inside the element. Things like the height and the width shouldn't be defined directly, to avoid the text of an element going outside of the element. This property is set using padding, which determines the space inside of the button, or element.

You can use the Chrome Dev tool to visualize the margin and padding, this is the green, orange, tan box model. It will tell you the full list of spacing for the element you have selected. 

These elements tell you what makes up an element, and how far away it is from everything else on the screen. 

### Using Padding and Margin

These two css elements are much more efficient to use, because they indicate spacing outside and inside of an html element. This is much more robust, because if you just use height and width, the text inside and element can be too large. However, defining the spacing with padding and margin allows the element to update and adjust when new text is added. So changing text will resize the element but keep the same spacing. 

### Alignment

The default behavior for browsers is to align text at the same level.

To align everything at the top there's a property for this called vertical align.


## Text Styles

Now we learn how to style text. Word and other text editors have tools for styling, and css has properties to do those actions. 

use the property `font-family` to change the font. Then there's a font-size, font-weight, etc. 

For any property you want, you can google to find the right css property. 